Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to learn how to delete an existing item or document from a MongoDB collection.
Without further ado, let's jump right into the action.
All right.
So when someone clicks on one of our delete buttons, we want to program the web browser to send off
a request to our node server with the particular I.D. of the document that should be deleted.
So this is very similar to the functionality we set up for the edit buttons.
So let's do this.
Let's jump into our text editor and be sure that you are in the browser JS file.
And remember, we set up this area where we said if the element that just got clicked on contains a
class of edit me, well, we just want to do the same thing, but for a class of delete me.
So let's do this just to stay organized.
Maybe right above this if line, let's add a new line, and let's add a comment.
So slash slash and let's say update feature.
So the web browser will ignore this comment.
This is just for our own organization.
Can then right above that.
Why don't we create another comment and say Delete feature?
All right.
And this is where we can write our new code for this lesson.
All right now, to save some typing, we could even just copy and paste this line of code.
So I'm just going to select this entire line of code that checks from the class list.
Copy that.
Up here on the delete feature, just paste in your clipboard.
Now we only copied this open in curly brackets, so be sure to add manually here a closing curly bracket,
but then feel free to drop down in between.
OK, let's change this class that we're checking for from edit me to delete me.
OK, so now what's the first thing that we actually want to do when someone clicks the delete button?
I think we should start with a pop up that asks the user if they're really sure.
Do you really want to delete this item permanently?
So within this if statement, let's set up another if statement.
So if parentheses curly brackets for this condition in these parentheses, we can use a web browser
feature named to confirm confirm as a method, so be sure to call it with parentheses.
Inside these parentheses, let's provide a string of text, and let's say, do you really want to delete
this item permanently?
You don't have to type this out, exactly.
You can include your own message here.
But the idea is that this will give the user a chance to click either yes or no or confirm or cancel.
So now only if the user clicks the yes or affirmative button will our code in these curly brackets actually
run.
So this is where we want to use Axios to have the browser send off an asynchronous or on the fly request
to our node server.
Now, in order to save a ton of typing, we can just copy and paste or reuse this Axios chunk of code
down here from our edit feature.
So down in the update code that we wrote in the previous lesson I want you to copy and paste these five
lines of code.
So starting from the A in Axios, down five lines to the closing curly bracket in parentheses here,
let's just copy those five lines of code into our clipboard and then up within our delete feature within
this inner nested if statement, let's just paste in our clipboard.
OK, now let's change some of this to make sense for our delete feature.
So instead of sending a post request to this URL of update item, let's change it to a URL of delete
item.
In a minute or two, we can set up our node app to listen for this URL request.
All right.
Next, in terms of what data do we actually want to send to our server?
Remember, this is a JavaScript object that we are sending.
We no longer need to send in updated custom text that the user typed.
So let's get rid of this first property of text and the comma right after it.
So now we just need to send a property of I.D. and this code will grab the ID value of the button that
was just clicked on.
With this in mind, we do need to make sure that our HTML template includes the I.D. on the delete button,
just like it did for the edit button.
Let me show you what I mean.
So right now, I want you to jump in to our server JS file.
Scroll down until you see our HTML template and we're looking for the unordered list that contains the
template for each item.
So we see two buttons.
The first is the edit button.
And remember, we gave it this data ID attribute of the Document ID.
So we just want to do the same thing for this delete button down here.
So what I'm going to do is just copy and paste from this data ID.
And so the closing quotes for that attribute and values.
Copy that.
And then just add it onto this second button.
This is the delete buttons right here.
Just paste in your clipboard and we're in business.
Let's go ahead and save this file and jump back into our Browser Dogs file.
OK, so we will now be successfully sending the correct I.D. to this URL.
And now the only other thing we need to change in this chunk of code is this line of code.
This is what's going to run once our server has had a chance to perform the database action and then
send its response back to the web browser.
Now for our update feature, remember, this is where we selected this little bit of text for the current
item and then manipulated or updated it in this case with our delete feature in mind.
We would just want to select the entire row or the entire list item and delete it completely.
Let me show you what I mean.
So currently, this line of code starts with at Target that's going to select the button that was clicked
on, and then we are looking for its parent element.
And then we are looking for the parent element of that right now.
I'm going to jump into our HTML template just so this code makes sense.
So here is our delete button that's going to get clicked on its parent element or that element that
it lives within is this div element.
And then the parent of this div element is the overall list item that makes up the entire row for this
item.
So with our update feature, we were looking within that list item and then we were using query selector
to find the element that had a class of item dash text, right?
So we were looking inside this element to find this element.
There's that matching class.
And then this is where we were just manipulating its inner HTML to have the user's new typed in input
this time around with the delete feature.
We don't need to look for this element.
So let's get rid of this dark query selector on this line.
So after the second parent element, I'm just going to delete the entire rest of that line.
So now we just have this exact target parent element dot parent element.
And now watch this.
Once you've selected that list item, we can just say Dot Remove, and that's a method.
So include parentheses to call it.
And that's it.
Now let's go ahead and save this file, and now we're only remaining step is to tell our node app or
express server what to do if it receives a post request to this delete item URL.
So right now, I want you to jump into Server Dot J.S. and go ahead and scroll down to the very bottom.
Let's add a new line down here at the very, very bottom.
And let's say at dot post, right?
If we receive an incoming post request two and then let's say for the URL of slash delete item.
For the second argument, we include a function of what we want to do if we do receive this request.
So anonymous function function, parentheses.
Curly brackets.
But then these parentheses be sure to include RFQ and R.C.S within the body of our function.
We want to work with our database DB Dot.
We want to select our collection that is named items.
And now this is where we perform a crud operation on this collection of documents.
So in the past, we used methods like insert one to create a document or find one and update.
In this case, we're interested in the aptly named method of delete one, right?
We want to delete one document from this collection.
Now, inside these parentheses, we want to give this method to arguments.
So a column will be for the first argument.
We want to select the document that we want to delete.
Let's actually circle back to that argument in a minute from now.
For now, let's set up this second argument.
So instead of this be placeholder, this is where we include a function that will run once this method
or database action has had a chance to complete.
So let's say function, parentheses, curly brackets.
Once our action completes, let's just send back a response to the browser's response dot send and let's
send back the word success.
All right, now, let's circle back to this a placeholder.
This is where we told MongoDB which document we want to delete now in order to save a bit of typing,
we can just recycle this code from our update feature.
Remember when we called the Find one and Update method, its first argument is also to select the correct
document.
So do this with me.
Select from this opening curly bracket within the Find one and update method.
Let's just select this object.
So from the first opening curly bracket until the first closing curly bracket copy that.
Then down in our delete feature, so that a placeholder down here, just paste in your clipboard.
All right.
At this point, go ahead and save this file.
Also, make sure that your browser dogs file has been saved.
And let's go test this out in the browser.
Be sure to refresh.
So the web browser has the newest front in JavaScript code, and I will try to delete this first item
of buy two bags of grapes today.
So if I click on Delete, this pop up appears.
Do you really want to delete this item permanently?
I will click OK, OK, we see that it disappeared from the front end, but that doesn't necessarily
mean that it was successfully deleted in our database.
So to be 100 percent sure that it actually worked, let's go into our MongoDB Atlas account and within
our To-Do App Items collection, you can see here is that item by two bags of grapes today.
But if I go ahead and click, find or reset here to refresh the latest data, awesome.
We can see there's only four documents instead of five.
And that item or document is now gone.
This means that technically our application is complete, right?
We've set up all four of the major crud actions.
The C in crud is create.
We've set that up with this form.
The orange crud is for read.
That's what happens when you reload or view the page right, it reads in the existing documents.
The use stands for Update, which is our edit feature, and the D stands for Delete, which is what
we just set up.
However, since we set up our update and delete features to use on the fly or asynchronous requests.
We might as well go back and improve our create feature to also use that same technology because currently,
if we type something into this field by carrots and then if I submit the form, it's actually going
to send a traditional form submit request, meaning the browser has to perform a hard or full page reload
or refresh and then rewrite render the entire web page from scratch again.
Now there's nothing inherently wrong with that, and in many applications or situations, you would
want a traditional form submit.
But within the context of this application, I think it makes sense for the create feature to be as
seamless and instantaneous as possible.
So when the user tries to submit their input here, instead of relying on our node app to redirect us
to this same URL and then re render the entire page just to see their new item, let's instead use Axios
to send off an asynchronous or on the fly request with whatever value they typed in.
And then we can use front end JavaScript to simply add on one new list item at the bottom of this list.
This way, the user experience is seamless.
The entire page does not get re rendered and the interface is just updated on the fly.
This is exactly what we're going to set up in our next lesson.
So let's keep things rolling, and I'll see you then.